Title: Learning domain-invariant features through channel-level sparsification for Out-Of Distribution Generalization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.25083v1

Published Time: Fri, 27 Mar 2026 00:56:42 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
# Learning domain-invariant features through channel-level sparsification for Out-Of Distribution Generalization 

Haoran Pei 1, Yuguang Yang 3, Kexin Liu 1, Juan Zhang 2, Baochang Zhang 2

1. School of Automation Science and Electrical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, P. R. China E-mail: sy2303515@buaa.edu.cn, E-mail: kxliu@buaa.edu.cn 2. School of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, P. R. China E-mail: bczhang@buaa.edu.cn, E-mail: zhang juan@buaa.edu.cn 3. School of Electronic Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, P. R. China E-mail: guangbuaa@buaa.edu.cn 

Abstract: Out-of-Distribution (OOD) generalization has become a primary metric for evaluating image analysis systems. Since deep learning models tend to capture domain-specific context, they often develop shortcut dependencies on these non-causal features, leading to inconsistent performance across different data sources. Current techniques, such as invariance learning, attempt to mitigate this. However, they struggle to isolate highly mixed features within deep latent spaces. This limitation prevents them from fully resolving the shortcut learning problem.In this paper, we propose Hierarchical Causal Dropout (HCD), a method that uses channel-level causal masks to enforce feature sparsity. This approach allows the model to separate causal features from spurious ones, effectively performing a causal intervention at the representation level. The training is guided by a Matrix-based Mutual Information (MMI) objective to minimize the mutual information between latent features and domain labels, while simultaneously maximizing the information shared with class labels.To ensure stability, we incorporate a StyleMix-driven VICReg module, which prevents the masks from accidentally filtering out essential causal data. Experimental results on OOD benchmarks show that HCD performs better than existing top-tier methods. 

Key Words: Out-of-Distribution (OOD) Generalization, Causal Representation Learning, Information-theoretic Constraints, Feature Decoupling 

1 Introduction 

Deep learning models have achieved remarkable suc-cess in image analysis. However, their performance often degrades significantly when deployed in unseen domains where the data distribution differs from the training set—a challenge known as Out-of-Distribution (OOD) generaliza-tion [17, 26]. In real-world applications, these distribution shifts typically arise from variations in environmental fac-tors, such as lighting, background context, or sensor spec-ifications [18]. For a model to be reliable, it must remain robust to these variations while focusing on the underlying invariant semantic features. To improve generalization, existing methods generally fo-cus on either data-level or feature-level adjustments. Data-level techniques aim to obscure domain-specific traits by simulating environmental diversity through augmentation. Feature-level frameworks instead focus on maintaining sta-tistical consistency across different training environments. However, both approaches often treat latent features as en-tangled representations, failing to explicitly separate intrin-sic causal factors from spurious correlations. As a result, models remain prone to shortcut learning, where they rely on unstable environmental cues rather than stable semantic features. Recently, causality-inspired methods have been intro-duced to mitigate these biases through spatial interven-tions [19, 21]. While these methods help direct model at-tention, they primarily operate in the pixel space, which is often insufficient for resolving entanglement in high-dimensional semantic spaces. In complex visual data, do-main biases—such as capture device signatures or environ-mental noise—are frequently encoded across feature chan-nels rather than being localized in specific pixels. This limi-tation necessitates a transition from spatial-level masking to more effective representation-level interventions. To resolve this bottleneck, we propose Hierarchical Causal Dropout (HCD) , a framework that shifts the inter-vention from the pixel space to the internal representation space. Unlike previous methods, HCD treats feature chan-nels as the fundamental units of intervention, performing structural surgery on the latent manifold. Specifically, we introduce an Advanced Feature Gater that acts as a causal filter, dynamically identifying and suppressing channels en-tangled with environmental biases. To guide this gating pro-cess, we utilize a Matrix-based Mutual Information (MMI) objective [28]. By calculating the Von Neumann entropy of feature kernels, we minimize the dependency between the gated representations and domain labels, effectively weaken the non-causal noise from the latent space. Furthermore, to ensure that the suppression of biased channels does not compromise the preservation of essen-tial task-relevant signals, we integrate a StyleMix-driven VI-CReg mechanism [4]. By generating synthetic OOD features via style-mixing in the latent space and applying Variance-Invariance-Covariance regularization, HCD forces the model to maintain representation consistency across diverse sim-ulated environments. This structured approach effectively decouples stable causal mechanisms from unstable noise across the network hierarchy. Finally, we evaluate HCD on diverse OOD benchmarks, including Camelyon17 and iWildCam, covering medical imaging, wildlife monitoring, and general object recogni-

> arXiv:2603.25083v1 [cs.CV] 26 Mar 2026

tion. Experimental results show that HCD consistently out-performs state-of-the-art methods. Our primary contributions are summarized as follows:  

> •

Representation-Level Intervention: We propose Hi-erarchical Causal Dropout (HCD), a method that uses a learnable gating mechanism for channel-wise causal masking. This approach moves beyond pixel-level per-turbations to directly intervene on the latent manifold.  

> •

Information-Theoretic Decoupling: We introduce a Matrix-based Mutual Information (MMI) objective. By leveraging matrix entropy, this objective quantifies and minimizes the leakage of domain-specific information, effectively isolating stable causal features.  

> •

Style-Invariant Regularization: We integrate StyleMix-driven VICReg to enforce feature-level con-sistency. This mechanism ensures the model maintains representation invariance against synthetic distribu-tion shifts, focusing on task-relevant semantic features rather than environmental noise. 

2 Related Work 

Targeted Feature Masking and Intervention. The evo-lution of masking techniques has moved from stochastic to structured approaches. Conventional Dropout aims to pre-vent co-adaptation by randomly zeroing neurons, but it is of-ten inefficient for OOD tasks because it ignores the semantic role of different feature dimensions [16, 20]. To address this, structured masking methods—such as Spatial Dropout or attention-guided masking—were developed to suppress re-dundant spatial regions rather than individual pixels [11, 14]. Unlike previous spatial-based interventions, HCD identifies and sparsifies specific feature channels that act as carriers for domain-specific noise. This provides a more granular decou-pling of causal representations from environmental biases. 

Information-Theoretic Decoupling and Bias Suppres-sion. A key strategy in mitigating spurious correlations is to minimize the mutual information between latent representa-tions and domain identifiers. While adversarial training is commonly used for this purpose, it often suffers from train-ing instability and sensitive hyperparameter tuning. Recent advances in Information Bottleneck (IB) theory and Mutual Information (MI) estimation [22, 29] provide a more prin-cipled framework for feature decoupling. Unlike traditional estimation, HCD leverages Matrix-based Mutual Informa-tion (MMI) to penalize domain entanglement, directly con-straining the latent manifold at minimal cost to suppress domain-specific information within the learned embeddings. 

Invariance Learning via Latent Augmentation and Regularization. Data-level augmentation often fails to cap-ture the complex distribution shifts present in real-world scenarios. To address this, latent space perturbation meth-ods—such as MixStyle [31] and DSU [15]—have been developed to simulate domain variations by manipulating feature statistics. MixStyle generates synthetic domains through the interpolation of feature moments, while DSU models these statistics as probabilistic distributions to cap-ture domain uncertainty. However, simply simulating shifts is often insufficient if the resulting latent representations remain redundant or entangled [1, 29]. Without explicit constraints, models may still capture spurious correlations through correlated feature pathways despite the increased di-versity in the training distribution. Unlike these approaches that focus primarily on simulating distribution shifts, HCD incorporates VICReg [4] as an active covariance-based reg-ularization to penalize cross-channel redundancy at minimal cost, thereby ensuring the model captures only invariant se-mantic features. 

3 Methodology 

We propose the Hierarchical Causal Dropout (HCD) framework to achieve representation-level decoupling for robust image analysis. In real-world settings, deep learn-ing models often fail under distribution shifts by relying on spurious, non-causal correlations—such as capture noise or environmental variations—rather than stable semantic fea-tures. To resolve feature entanglement, HCD performs representation-level interventions on internal feature chan-nels. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the framework consists of three components: (1) Channel-Level Sparsification, which introduces an information bottleneck to isolate domain-specific shortcuts; (2) Information-Theoretic Decoupling, which utilizes matrix-based R´ enyi information [2] to mini-mize domain correlations within the latent manifold; and (3) Latent-Level Regularization, which leverages MixStyle and VICReg to improve OOD generalization. 

3.1 Channel-Level Sparsification for Causal Disentan-glement 

In standard convolutional networks, the high-dimensional latent representation z ∈ RD typically acts as a dense, entangled descriptor. Causal semantic factors (domain-invariant) and spurious environmental factors (domain-dependent) are highly entangled across channel dimensions. Because domain-specific styles are often easier for the net-work to optimize, the model naturally forms shortcut path-ways, where these non-causal factors dominate the final pre-dictions. To address this, we introduce an Adaptive Feature Gat-ing Module G(·) designed to perform representation-level intervention via channel sparsification. Given an interme-diate feature map, we apply global average pooling to obtain the latent vector z. The gater subsequently generates a con-tinuous, channel-wise intervention mask ˜m ∈ (0 , 1) D :

˜m = σ (W2 · ReLU (BN (W1z))) (1) where W1 ∈ R Dr ×D and W2 ∈ RD× Dr are learnable pa-rameters. The reduction ratio r forces the feature projection through an information bottleneck. This constraint induces a competition mechanism among channels, compelling the network to prune redundant dimensions and assign high ac-tivation values exclusively to the most informative pathways. The sparse representation is then formulated as ˆz = z ⊙ ˜m,where ⊙ denotes the Hadamard product. Sparsification serves as the structural prerequisite for causal disentanglement. By restricting the available chan-nel capacity, the gater forces the representation into a constrained state. When combined with the subsequent information-theoretic penalties (detailed in Section 3.2), the model is encouraged to allocate its limited active channels Fig. 1: Overview of the proposed HCD framework. Black dots ( •) denote branching points. exclusively to robust, invariant semantic features, effectively excluding domain-specific noise that can no longer fit within the sparse bandwidth. Furthermore, to prevent the model from developing a excessive reliance on a single dominant channel, we ap-ply a probabilistic dropout layer ( p = 0 .2) following the gating mechanism. By injecting a Bernoulli noise vector 

ξ ∼ Bern (1 − p), the expected classification risk becomes: 

min  

> θ

Ez∼P (z),ξ∼Bern (1 −p)[LCE (f (z ⊙ ˜m ⊙ ξ), y )] (2) This randomized sparsification penalizes single-channel reliance, forcing the predictor f (·) to discover and main-tain multiple independent causal pathways. Consequently, even if primary channels are suppressed during training, the remaining active pathways preserve semantic integrity, en-hancing the model’s OOD robustness. 

3.2 Information-Theoretic Decoupling via Matrix Mu-tual Information 

To ensure that the gated representation ˆz is independent of the domain identifier d while remaining predictive of the label y, we introduce an objective based on Matrix-based Mutual Information (MMI). The theoretical foundation for using MI as a decoupling constraint lies in its ability to mea-sure the statistical dependence between variables. Formally, 

I(ˆz; d) = 0 if and only if P (ˆz, d ) = P (ˆz)P (d), implying that the distribution of learned features is identical across different domains. By minimizing I(ˆz; d), we impose a variational con-straint on the latent manifold that penalizes any encoding of domain-specific signatures. In our implementation, this is achieved by minimizing the spectral overlap between the feature kernel matrix Kˆz and the domain kernel matrix Kd.From an information-theoretic perspective, this process acts as a selective filter: it forces the network to discard informa-tion that is highly correlated with the environment but redun-dant for the classification task. To implement this without explicit density estimation, we utilize the spectral properties of kernel matrices in a Repro-ducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS). We define a normal-ized kernel matrix K ∈ Rn×n, where Kij = 1 

> n

κ(zi, z j ),which is normalized by its trace to ensure the eigenvalues sum to unity. Following the matrix-based formulation of R´ enyi entropy [2] of order α = 2 , the entropy is computed as S(K) = − log 2(tr (K2)) . The objective to minimize Do-main MI is then formulated as the loss term LM I D :

LM I D = I(ˆz; d)= S(Kˆz ) + S(Kd) − S

 Kˆz ⊙ Kd

tr (Kˆz ⊙ Kd)

 (3) While minimizing I(ˆz; d) bleaches non-causal noise, we simultaneously maximize Class MI to ensure that task-relevant semantic information is preserved, which is defined as LM I C = −I(ˆz; y).Furthermore, to encourage the Adaptive Feature Gating module to select only the most discriminative channels and discard redundant features, we impose a Sparse Loss on the gating mask m. This is formulated as the L1-norm of the mask activations: 

Lsparse = 1

C ∥m∥1 (4) This joint optimization of mutual information and feature sparsity creates an information bottleneck that converges to-ward an invariant and discriminative representation. 

3.3 StyleMix-driven VICReg Regularization 

While the Matrix MI-based decoupling acts as a cor-rective filter against observed domain biases, it risks over-suppressing subtle causal signals that are statistically corre-lated with the source environment. To mitigate this, we inte-grate StyleMix latent perturbation with Variance-Invariance-Covariance Regularization (VICReg) to serve as a regular-ization anchor. This combination enables StyleMix to proac-tively expand the diversity of the latent manifold through synthetic style perturbations, while VICReg provides the structural stabilization needed to anchor the gated represen-tations against collapse and preserve invariant semantic in-tegrity. Following the principles of Adaptive Instance Normaliza-tion (AdaIN) [6], a feature map F ∈ RC×H×W can be decomposed into domain-invariant content ˆF and domain-specific style statistics {μ(F ), σ (F )}, such that F = σ(F ) ·

ˆF + μ(F ). To simulate potential domain shifts without accessing target data, our StyleMix Generator implements an AdaIN-based virtual sampling mechanism in the latent space. For a given sample Fi, the module shuffles the style statistics within a mini-batch using a random permutation π,generating a novel perturbed feature ˜Fi:

˜Fi = σπ(i) ·

 Fi − μi

σi + ϵ



+ μπ(i) (5) where ϵ is a small constant used for numerical stability. This operation effectively leverages the AdaIN operator to ex-plore the combinatorial space of style distributions, expand-ing the observable domain boundaries. To enforce representation consistency across these syn-thetic shifts, the VICReg framework is applied to the pro-jected embeddings z = g(ˆ z) and ˜z = g(˜ zaug ). As de-fined in our vicreg loss module, the objective incorporates three distinct constraints: invariance, variance, and covari-ance. The invariance loss Lsim = ∥z − ˜z∥22 penalizes vari-ations caused by style perturbation, effectively driving the partial derivatives of the representation with respect to style statistics towards zero. In information-theoretic terms, this ensures that lim Lsim →0 I(z; S|C) = 0 , guaranteeing distri-butional invariance. Simultaneously, the variance constraint 

Lstd = 1

> D

PDj=1 max(0 , γ − σj ) maintains informational richness by forcing the batch-wise standard deviation σj of each feature dimension above a fixed threshold γ, while the covariance loss Lcov = 1

> D

P 

> i̸=j

[C(z)] 2 

> i,j

penalizes the off-diagonal elements of the covariance matrix C(z) to reduce cross-channel redundancy. Finally, these components are ag-gregated to form the total VICReg loss: 

Lvic = λsim Lsim + λstd Lstd + λcov Lcov (6) By minimizing LGram = ∥GM (F ) − GM ( ˜F )∥2 

> F

, we ensure that intrinsic semantic co-activations remain robust against stylistic permutations. This hierarchical approach ensures that both global embeddings and local spatial pat-terns contribute to OOD robustness. Finally, the proposed formulation is justified by the do-main adaptation theory [7], which bounds the target domain error ϵT (h) by the source error ϵS (h) and the domain diver-gence dH∆H. Through StyleMix perturbation, we artificially expand the support of the source distribution DS . Concur-rently, the integrated VICReg and Gram constraints explic-itly minimize dH∆H by aligning causal feature distributions across stylistic shifts. This mathematical framework tight-ens the upper bound of the target risk, providing a theoretical guarantee for superior OOD generalization. 

3.4 Joint Optimization and Curriculum Scheduling 

Following the optimization procedure outlined in Algo-rithm 1, the total objective function for HCD explicitly inte-grates the six core components, formulated as: 

Ltotal =Lcls + β1Lvic + β2LGram 

+ β(t)3 LM I C + β(t)4 LM I D + β(t)5 Lsparse 

(7) To effectively balance these objectives and ensure training stability, we implement the weight coefficients β(t)3 , β(t)4 ,and β(t)5 using a curriculum scheduling strategy. Specifically, in the initial epochs, the model focuses on learning basic discriminative features by setting these penalty weights near zero. As training progresses, they are gradually increased to their target values. This curriculum allows the model to transition smoothly from a standard clas-sifier to a domain-agnostic feature extractor, preventing the sparsification and disentanglement mechanisms from col-lapsing before the network has captured sufficient semantic information. 

Algorithm 1 Hierarchical Causal Dropout (HCD) Frame-work  

> 1:

Input: Training data X, category labels y, and domain indices 

d 

> 2:

Output: Optimized domain-invariant model h(f (·))  

> 3:

Initialize model parameters θ and feature gating module G(·) 

> 4:

for each training iteration do  

> 5:

Feature Selection & Encoding:  

> 6:

Extract backbone features: F = f (X) 

> 7:

Apply channel-wise gating for task-relevant selection: 

z, mask = G(F ) 

> 8:

Stylized Feature Synthesis:  

> 9:

Generate OOD variations via StyleMix (statistic shuffling): 

Fstyle = StyleMix (F ) 

> 10:

Encode stylized features: zstyle = G(f (Fstyle ))  

> 11:

Loss Computation (Core Principles):  

> 12:

1. Classification : Lcls = CrossEntropy (h(z), y ) 

> 13:

2. Sparsity : Lsparse = L1Norm (mask ) 

> 14:

3. Style Regularization : Lvic and LGram  

> 15:

4. Information Bottleneck : LM I C and LM I D  

> 16:

Total Objective:  

> 17:

L = Lcls + β1Lvic + β2LGram + β3LM I C + β4LM I D +

β5Lsparse  

> 18:

Update θ by minimizing L 

> 19:

end for  

> 20:

return Optimized model h(f (·)) 

4 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 

4.1 Datasets and Implementation Details 

We evaluate the HCD framework on two large-scale benchmarks from the WILDS collection[12], which repre-sent distinct and challenging real-world distribution shifts:  

> •

Camelyon17[8]: A digital pathology dataset for tumor detection in lymph node sections. It captures clinical distribution shifts across five medical centers. Vari-ations in staining protocols and imaging equipment present a formidable challenge for model robustness.  

> •

iWildCam[5]: A wildlife monitoring dataset where the model must generalize to unseen camera trap loca-tions. The shift involves drastic variations in illumina-tion, background vegetation, and sensor characteristics across 323 different sites. Architectural Configuration. To ensure a fair compar-ison, we adopt DenseNet-121 as the backbone for Came-lyon17 and ResNet-50 for iWildCam, following standard benchmark protocols. In contrast to many existing works that leverage ImageNet-pretrained weights, our model is trained from scratch to ensure that the learned representa-tions are derived entirely from the target histopathological and ecological domains, avoiding pre-training bias. 

Optimization and Hyperparameters. We utilize the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 2 × 10 −4 and a batch size of 32. To maintain training stability and prevent premature collapse of the disentanglement mechanism, we strictly follow the curriculum scheduling strategy. Specifi-cally, the domain-disentanglement weight β(t)3 is initially set to 0.5 and scaled to 5.0 after the first epoch, while the spar-sity penalty β(t)4 is gradually increased from 0.005 to 0.1

starting from the third epoch ( t ≥ 2). For the representation consistency terms, we fix λv = 1 .0 and β = 1 .0. All experi-ments are conducted across five independent runs with fixed random seeds (0–4) to guarantee reproducibility. 

4.2 Comparative Baselines 

We compare HCD against two representative paradigms in domain generalization and efficient learning:  

> •

ERM (Empirical Risk Minimization)[25]: The stan-dard training baseline that minimizes the average loss across all training domains without explicit domain-invariant regularization.  

> •

Bonsai [30]: A state-of-the-art method for resource-efficient learning that employs tree-based conditional computation. We use it as a primary competitor to eval-uate how our gating-based sparsification compares to traditional sparse learning approaches in the context of domain decoupling. Using the features derived from these models as a foun-dation, we extended our evaluation to incorporate several prominent domain-invariant strategies, such as IRMv1[3], IRMX[9], VREx[13], and GroupDRO[23]. 

4.3 Representation Analysis and Interpretability Pro-tocols 

To evaluate the decision-making logic and generalization robustness of the HCD framework, we implement two com-plementary visualization protocols: 

Spatial Attribution via CAM. Following a comparative analysis with representative class activation mapping meth-ods, such as CAM [32] and DecomCAM[27], we employ Grad-CAM [24] for decision visualization, primarily driven by its superior architectural flexibility. While CAM is lim-ited by specific structural constraints and DecomCAM intro-duces higher computational overhead, Grad-CAM produces high-fidelity saliency maps for arbitrary CNN architectures without necessitating model modifications, thereby ensur-ing a both faithful and efficient interpretation. By generat-ing heatmaps from the final convolutional layers, we verify whether HCD directs its attention toward invariant semantic structures (e.g., pathological markers or animal silhouettes) rather than domain-specific environmental noise (e.g., stain-ing artifacts or background textures). This provides direct visual evidence that our disentanglement mechanism effec-tively filters out spurious correlations. 

Generalization Analysis via Loss Landscape. We an-alyze the Loss Landscape Sharpness [10] to assess the model’s stability against distribution shifts, as the loss land-scape provides an intuitive way to demonstrate the model’s robustness. By visualizing the loss surface around the con-verged parameters, we aim to demonstrate that HCD leads the model into a flatter optimization region compared to ERM. This relative flatness reflects the model’s stability un-der the interference of domain-specific information; in opti-mization theory, such stability is strongly correlated with su-perior OOD performance and reduced sensitivity to the het-erogeneous context shifts encountered in unseen domains, ensuring more reliable performance across diverse environ-ments. 

5 RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 

Table 1: Camelyon and iWildCam Results                                        

> INIT. METHOD Camelyon iWildCam ERM IRM 75.68(±7.41)% 28.76(±0.45)% ERM IRMX 73.49(±9.33)% 28.82(±0.47)% ERM GroupDRO 76.09(±6.46)% 28.51(±0.58)% ERM VRex 71.60(±7.88)% 28.82(±0.47)% Bonsai IRM 73.59(±6.16)% 27.60(±1.57)% Bonsai IRMX 64.77(±10.1)% 27.62(±0.66)% Bonsai GroupDRO 72.82(±5.37)% 27.16(±1.18)% Bonsai VRex 76.39(±5.32)% 25.81(±0.42)% HCD IRM 84.31(±2.64)% 32.94(±0.63)% HCD IRMX 85.91(±1.70)% 31.10(±0.48)% HCD GroupDRO 86.16(±2.97)% 33.09(±0.62)% HCD VRex ∗86.62(±2.65)% 31.57(±0.79)%

Comparison results. As summarized in Table 1, the proposed HCD framework demonstrates superior general-ization performance across both histopathological and eco-logical monitoring domains. On the Camelyon17 dataset, HCD achieves a peak accuracy of 86.62%, significantly outperforming the standard ERM and Bonsai baseline. More importantly, in the challenging long-tailed iWild-Cam benchmark, HCD maintains a robust accuracy range of 31.10%–33.09%. This result is particularly signifi-cant as it resolves the performance collapse typically ob-served in spatial-domain perturbation methods when dealing with rare species. Unlike aggressive spatial augmentation, HCD’s channel-wise sparsification and information bottle-neck mechanisms offer a more essential way to filter envi-ronmental noise. By effectively stripping away spurious cor-relations while preserving sparse but vital semantic features of tail categories, HCD ensures that the model does not sac-rifice rare-class discriminability for domain invariance. 

Class Activation Mapping results. To further interpret the decision-making logic, we analyze the Grad-CAM re-sults on iWildCam, as shown in Fig. 2. As illustrated in this qualitative analysis, HCD exhibits a remarkable ability to lock onto the invariant semantic core of objects across di-verse and degraded conditions, including high-noise noctur-nal shots, infrared captures, and heavy vegetation occlusion. While baseline models like Bonsai or ERM often exhibit sig-nificant attention dispersion—shifting toward environmen-tal artifacts or background textures—HCD’s focus remains tightly anchored to the core contours of the animal subjects. This provides direct visual evidence that our Hierarchical Causal Gating effectively suppresses the activation of short-cut channels that encode domain-specific noise. By phys-ically blocking non-causal information flow, HCD ensures that the network’s predictive logic is grounded in stable bio-logical markers rather than spurious environmental correla-tions. 

Fig. 2: Visual comparison of Grad-CAM on the iWildCam dataset. Columns from left to right: HCD, Bonsai, and ERM. HCD maintains precise target localization across complex scenarios such as nocturnal noise, infrared imaging, and severe vegetation occlusion , effectively ignoring domain-specific environmental backgrounds. 

Fig. 3: Visualization of Loss Landscapes. Columns from left to right: HCD, Bonsai, and ERM. HCD demonstrates a significantly flatter and more expansive basin structure, re-flecting its superior stability and reduced sensitivity to the distribution shifts encountered in open-world environments. 

Loss landscapes results. The robustness of HCD is fur-ther corroborated by the Loss Landscape analysis. Our framework yields a notably wider, smoother, and more sym-metrical basin structure compared to the sharper landscapes of traditional DG methods. In optimization theory, such flat minima are indicative of a parameter space that is highly in-sensitive to distribution shifts. By reshaping the topological structure of the parameter space through Matrix MI and spar-sity constraints, HCD ensures that both head and tail classes reside in a stable optimization region. This geometric stabil-ity explains the framework’s consistent performance across unseen hospitals and camera sites, confirming that the model has converged to a solution that prioritizes causal invariance over empirical fitting. 

6 Conclusions 

In this paper, we proposed HCD , a novel representation learning framework that integrates channel sparsification with matrix-based information bottleneck theory to achieve robust Out-of-Distribution generalization. Unlike traditional methods that rely solely on soft regularization, HCD estab-lishes a synergistic mechanism involving Feature Style Mix-ing for counterfactual intervention, Matrix R´ enyi Mutual In-formation for precise disentanglement, and Adaptive Chan-nel Gating for the physical blockage of non-causal informa-tion. Extensive experiments on the Camelyon17 and iWild-Cam benchmarks demonstrate that HCD significantly out-performs standard ERM and sparse-learning baselines like Bonsai. Notably, HCD exhibits superior stability in long-tailed distributions, as its gentle channel-filtering approach protects scarce semantic features of tail categories while ef-fectively stripping away institutional and environmental bi-ases. Visualizations via CAM and Loss Landscapes further confirm that HCD leads the model toward a flatter optimiza-tion region and anchors its attention onto invariant semantic cores across diverse and degraded scenarios. Despite these gains, certain limitations persist: the cur-rent matrix-based MI estimation entails quadratic computa-tional complexity with respect to batch size, which may limit scalability to extremely large-scale training regimes. Fu-ture work will focus on developing low-rank approximations for spectral entropy calculation and exploring the applicabil-ity of HCD across a broader range of multimodal and self-supervised learning architectures 

References                    

> [1] R. Abbasi, M. H. Rohban, and M. S. Baghshah, Deciphering the role of representation disentanglement: Investigating com-positional generalization in clip models, in Proceedings of Eu-ropean Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , Milan, Italy: Springer Nature Switzerland AG, 2024(September): 35–50. [2] J. Acharya, A. Orlitsky, A. T. Suresh, and H. Tyagi, Estimating R´ enyi entropy of discrete distributions. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 2016, 63(1): 38–56. [3] M. Arjovsky, L. Bottou, I. Gulrajani, and D. Lopez-Paz, Invari-ant risk minimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893 , 2019. [4] A. Bardes, J. Ponce, and Y. LeCun, Vicreg: Variance-invariance-covariance regularization for self-supervised learn-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.04906 , 2021. [5] S. Beery, A. Agarwal, E. Cole, and V. Birodkar, The iwildcam 2021 competition dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.03494 ,2021. [6] X. Huang and S. Belongie, Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance normalization, in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , Venice, Italy: IEEE, 2017(October): 1501–1510. [7] S. Ben-David, J. Blitzer, K. Crammer, A. Kulesza, F. Pereira, and J. W. Vaughan, A theory of learning from different do-mains. Machine learning , 2010, 79(1): 151–175. [8] P. B´ andi, O. Geessink, Q. Manson, M. van Dijk, M. Balken-hol, M. Hermsen, B. E. Bejnordi, B. Lee, K. Paeng, A. Zhong, Q. Li, F. G. Zanjani, S. Zinger, K. Fukuta, D. Komura, V. Ovtcharov, S. Cheng, S. Zeng, J. Thagaard, A. B. Dahl,

H. Lin, H. Chen, L. Jacobsson, M. Hedlund, M. C ¸ etin, E. Halıcı, H. Jackson, R. Chen, F. Both, J. Franke, H. K¨ usters-Vandevelde, W. Vreuls, P. Bult, B. van Ginneken, J. van der Laak, and G. Litjens, From detection of individual metastases to classification of lymph node status at the patient level: the camelyon17 challenge. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imag-ing , 2018, 38(2): 550–560. [9] Y. Chen, K. Zhou, Y. Bian, B. Xie, B. Wu, Y. Zhang, K. Ma, H. Yang, P. Zhao, B. Han, and J. Cheng, Pareto invari-ant risk minimization: Towards mitigating the optimization dilemma in out-of-distribution generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07766 , 2022. [10] P. Foret, A. Kleiner, H. Mobahi, and B. Neyshabur, Sharpness-aware minimization for efficiently improving gen-eralization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.01412 , 2020. [11] J. Guo, L. Qi, Y. Shi, and Y. Gao, PLACE dropout: A progres-sive layer-wise and channel-wise dropout for domain general-ization. ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Com-munications and Applications , 2023, 20(3): 1–23. [12] P. W. Koh, S. Sagawa, H. Marklund, S. M. Xie, M. Zhang, A. Balsubramani, W. Hu, M. Yasunaga, R. L. Phillips, I. Gao, T. Lee, E. David, I. Stavness, W. Guo, B. Earnshaw, I. Haque, S. M. Beery, J. Leskovec, A. Kundaje, E. Pierson, S. Levine, C. Finn, and P. Liang, Wilds: A benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts, in Proceedings of International Confer-ence on Machine Learning (ICML) , Vienna, Austria: PMLR, 2021(July): 5637–5664. [13] D. Krueger, E. Caballero, J. H. Jacobsen, A. Zhang, J. Binas, D. Zhang, R. L. Priol, and A. Courville, Out-of-distribution generalization via risk extrapolation (rex), in Proceedings of International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , Vi-enna, Austria: PMLR, 2021(July): 5815–5826. [14] J. Li, P. Chen, Z. He, S. Yu, S. Liu, and J. Jia, Rethinking out-of-distribution (ood) detection: Masked image modeling is all you need, in Proceedings of IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , Vancouver, BC, Canada: IEEE, 2023(June): 11578–11589. [15] X. Li, Y. Dai, Y. Ge, J. Liu, Y. Shan, and L. Y. Duan, Un-certainty modeling for out-of-distribution generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.03958 , 2022. [16] X. Liang, L. Wu, J. Li, Y. Wang, Q. Meng, T. Qin, W. Chen, M. Zhang, and T. Y. Liu, R-drop: Regularized dropout for neural networks, in Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems (NeurIPS) , Vancouver, BC, Canada: Curran Asso-ciates, Inc., 2021(December): 10890–10905. [17] J. Liu, S. Yan, Y. He, X. Zhang, R. Xu, H. Yu, and P. Cui, Towards out-of-distribution generalization: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.13624 , 2021. [18] P. Amerikanos and I. Maglogiannis, Image analysis in digi-tal pathology utilizing machine learning and deep neural net-works. Journal of Personalized Medicine , 2022, 12(9): 1444. [19] C. Mao, A. Cha, A. Gupta, H. Wang, J. Yang, and C. Von-drick, Generative interventions for causal learning, in Proceed-ings of IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , Nashville, TN, USA (Virtual): IEEE, 2021(June): 3947–3956. [20] W. Mou, Y. Zhou, J. Gao, and L. Wang, Dropout training, data-dependent regularization, and generalization bounds, in 

Proceedings of International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , Stockholm, Sweden: PMLR, 2018(July): 3645–3653. [21] W. M. Pernice, M. Doron, A. Quach, A. Pratapa, S. Kenjeyev, N. De Veaux, M. Hirano, and J. C. Caicedo, Out of distribu-tion generalization via interventional style transfer in single-cell microscopy, in Proceedings of IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , Vancouver, BC, Canada: IEEE, 2023(June): 4326–4335. [22] Z. Qi, S. Khorram, and F. Li, Visualizing Deep Networks by Optimizing with Integrated Gradients, in Proceedings of AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) , Palo Alto, CA: AAAI Press, 2020(February): 11890–11898. [23] S. Sagawa, P. W. Koh, T. B. Hashimoto, and P. Liang, Distri-butionally robust neural networks for group shifts: On the im-portance of regularization for worst-case generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.08731 , 2019. [24] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and D. Batra, Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localization, in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) ,Venice, Italy: IEEE, 2017(October): 618–626. [25] V. Vapnik, Principles of risk minimization for learning theory, in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) ,San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1991(December): 831– 838. [26] Y. Yang, H. Zhang, J. W. Gichoya, D. Katabi, and M. Ghas-semi, The limits of fair medical imaging AI in real-world gen-eralization. Nature Medicine , 2024, 30(10): 2838–2848. [27] Y. Yang, R. Guo, S. Wu, Y. Wang, L. Yang, B. Fan, J. Zhong, J. Zhang, and B. Zhang, DecomCAM: Advancing beyond saliency maps through decomposition and integration. Neuro-computing , 2024, 610: 127826. [28] S. Yu, L. G. S. Giraldo, R. Jenssen, and J. C. Principe, Mul-tivariate Extension of Matrix-Based R´ enyi’s α-Order Entropy Functional. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Ma-chine Intelligence , 2019, 42(11): 2960–2966. [29] H. Zhang, Y. F. Zhang, W. Liu, A. Weller, B. Sch¨ olkopf, and E. P. Xing, Towards principled disentanglement for do-main generalization, in Proceedings of IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , New Or-leans, LA, USA: IEEE, 2022(June): 8024–8034. [30] J. Zhang, D. Lopez-Paz, and L. Bottou, Rich feature con-struction for the optimization-generalization dilemma, in Pro-ceedings of International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , Baltimore, MD, USA: PMLR, 2022(July): 26397– 26411. [31] K. Zhou, Y. Yang, Y. Qiao, and T. Xiang, Domain generaliza-tion with mixstyle. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.02008 , 2021. [32] B. Zhou, A. Khosla, A. Lapedriza, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba, Learning deep features for discriminative localization, in Pro-ceedings of IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , Las Vegas, NV, USA: IEEE, 2016(June): 2921–2929.