Title: Is your algorithm unlearning or untraining?

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.07962v1

Published Time: Fri, 10 Apr 2026 00:45:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Is your algorithm unlearning or untraining? 

Eleni Triantafillou 1, Ahmed Imtiaz Humayun 1, Mónica Ribero 1, Alexander Matt Turner 1, Michael C. Mozer 1

and Georgios Kaissis 2 

> 1Google, 2Hasso Plattner Institute

As models are getting larger and are trained on increasing amounts of data, there has been an explosion of interest into how we can “delete” specific data points or behaviours from a trained model, after the fact. This goal has been referred to as “machine unlearning”. In this note, we argue that the term “unlearning” has been overloaded, with different research efforts spanning two distinct problem formulations, but without that distinction having been observed or acknowledged in the literature. This causes various issues, including ambiguity around when an algorithm is expected to work, use of inappropriate metrics and baselines when comparing different algorithms to one another, difficulty in interpreting results, as well as missed opportunities for pursuing critical research directions. In this note, we address this issue by establishing a fundamental distinction between two notions that we identify as Unlearning and Untraining , illustrated in Figure 1. In short, Untraining aims to reverse the effect of having trained on a given forget set, i.e. to remove the influence that that specific forget set examples had on the model during training. On the other hand, the goal of Unlearning is not just to remove the influence of those given examples, but to use those examples for the purpose of more broadly removing the entire underlying distribution from which those examples were sampled (e.g. the concept or behaviour that those examples represent). We discuss technical definitions of these problems and map problem settings studied in the literature to each. We hope to initiate discussions on disambiguating technical definitions and identify a set of overlooked research questions, as we believe that this a key missing step for accelerating progress in the field of “unlearning”. 

# 1. Introduction 

“Unlearning” was first coined by Cao and Yang (2015), who envisioned systems that are “capa-ble of forgetting certain data and their lineages, completely and quickly”. Since then, there has been an explosion of work on the topic. Most early work on “unlearning” was motivated by regulations such as EU’s General Data Protec-tion Regulation (Mantelero, 2013) that stipulate that individuals have the “right to be forgotten”. Specifically, in the event where an individual ex-ercises this right after their data has already been used to train a machine learning model, we re-quire technical solutions for “deleting” that data from the model, and research in “unlearning” aims to address this need (Bourtoule et al., 2021; Golatkar et al., 2020a,b; Neel et al., 2021; Sekhari et al., 2021; Thudi et al., 2022). However, more recently, several works pro-pose methods that use “unlearning” for a wider range of use cases, including removing danger-ous “knowledge” that could e.g. aid a malicious actor to develop biological, cyber-, and chemi-cal weapons (Li et al., 2024), removing harmful “capabilities” or “concepts” to make models safer (Barez et al., 2025; Fan et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2025, 2024; Łucki et al., 2024; Lynch et al., 2024; Yao et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024a), erasing backdoors (Liu et al., 2022), eliminating poison-ing attacks (Pawelczyk et al., 2024; Schoepf et al., 2024, 2025), unlearning copyrighted content like the “Harry Potter” books (Eldan and Russinovich, 2023; Shi et al., 2024) or specific artistic styles (Fan et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024c). Unfortunately, the above works span two dis-tinct problem formulations, both of which are referred to as “unlearning” in the literature. This overloading of terminology causes confusion, can lead to false expectations for when a method should and shouldn’t work, to using inappropri-ate metrics or baselines when evaluating differ-ent algorithms, to a lack of clear interpretation  

> Corresponding author(s): etriantafillou@google.com
> ©2026 Google. All rights reserved
> arXiv:2604.07962v1 [cs.LG] 9 Apr 2026 Is your algorithm unlearning or untraining?

of results, and to slow progress in answering fun-damental research questions. In this note, we begin to address this issue by making a novel distinction between two notions that we refer to as Unlearning and Untrain-ing , which are two distinct problem formulations both of which are recently well-studied, and both of which are unfortunately referred to as “un-learning”. Intuitively, the key distinction is that 

Untraining simply removes the effect of hav-ing trained on the forget set, i.e. the influence of the specific forget set examples. On the other hand, Unlearning goes beyond removing (the influence of) those specific examples and gener-alizes to removing the influence of the underly-ing distribution from which those examples are sampled. Notable examples from the literature are “unlearning” user data for privacy purposes, which as actually an Untraining problem, ver-sus removing dangerous behaviours from some specified examples of those behaviours, which is an Unlearning problem. In the following sections, we will first review important background and define key notions of training, learning, and example influence. We will then draw parallels between learning and training towards the two notions that we refer to as Unlearning and Untraining , respec-tively. We will present technical definitions for 

Unlearning and Untraining , drawing from previously-proposed definitions from the litera-ture for the latter, and map them to settings stud-ied in the literature. We will discuss how the solu-tions to these two problem settings differ through illustrative examples, the practical importance of making this distinction, and we will close by dis-cussing important research questions for future work. 

# 2. Training and learning 

To set the scene for discussing the distinction be-tween Untraining and Unlearning , we first revisit the definitions of training and learning, and related concepts of memorization and gener-alization. 

Training , from a statistical learning theory per-spective (Vapnik, 2013), can be defined as the process of obtaining a function that minimizes empirical risk on a finite dataset D, which gen-erally involves solving an optimization problem. For parametric functions like neural networks, the goal of training algorithm A is to find a set of parameters 𝜃 that minimizes the error on a specific finite set of data D.

Learning , on the other hand, is defined as re-ducing expected risk on the underlying data distri-bution. In machine learning, the goal of a training algorithm is to lead to learning. That is, the goal is to train on a finite set of samples D and gen-eralize for the underlying data distribution from which D was sampled. In that sense, the notions of learning and generalization are closely related, and we treat them as synonymous in this note. 

Does Training always lead to Learning? In many cases it does. But there are also cases where “overfitting” happens: the phenomenon where the training loss decreases (i.e. risk minimization is successful on the training data) but the loss of held-out examples increases (i.e generalization does not occur). To address this, there is a vast literature exploring the design of training algo-rithms that optimally result in learning, e.g., op-timization techniques like sharpness aware min-imization (Foret et al., 2021) that use the loss landscape geometry to reach a flatter minima, techniques like MixUp (Zhang et al., 2017) that improve generalization by augmenting the train-ing data with convex combinations of samples, and regularization techniques like spectral nor-malization of parameters (Miyato et al., 2018) that improves Lipschitz continuity of the learned function. Recent work has also observed a phenomenon referred to as grokking or delayed generalization (Humayun et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2023; Power et al., 2022) , where deep networks initially per-fectly fit the training data but perform poorly for a held out dataset from the underlying data distribution—until a large number of training it-erations. This discussion points to an important finding: a finite training dataset D may or may not influ-ence the behavior of the obtained function for 

> 2Is your algorithm unlearning or untraining?

samples that are not in D. In the following sec-tion, we formalize how examples included in D

influence training and learning in different ways. 

# 3. Influence of examples on training 

The way in which different examples influence the function obtained via training remains an active area of research (Jaeckel, 1972; Koh and Liang, 2017; Pruthi et al., 2020). A phenomenon that has been studied extensively is the fact that certain examples of D can influence train-ing very strongly, causing those examples to be 

memorized by the resulting model. Feldman (2020); Zhang et al. (2023) define different no-tions that capture “counterfactual memorization”. The counterfactual memorization score for a train-ing example according to Feldman (2020) is given as follows. 

Definition 3.1. Memorization score (Feldman, 2020). The memorization score for an example 

𝑥 𝑖 ∈ D , with respect to a training dataset D and training algorithm A is mem (A , D, 𝑖 ) = Pr   

> 𝑓 ∼A ( D )

[ 𝑓 (𝑥 𝑖 ) = 𝑦 𝑖 ]− Pr    

> 𝑓 ∼A ( D\{ 𝑥 𝑖 } )

[ 𝑓 (𝑥 𝑖 ) = 𝑦 𝑖 ] (1) where the probability distributions are over the randomness of the algorithm A and where 𝑥 𝑖 

and 𝑦 𝑖 are the feature and label, respectively, of example with index 𝑖 .The first term in the above equation considers models trained on all of D whereas the second term considers the counterfactual world of mod-els trained on D excluding example 𝑥 𝑖 . Intuitively, the memorization score for an example 𝑥 𝑖 is high if including it in training results in a higher prob-ability of the function producing the target label 

𝑦 𝑖 for 𝑥 𝑖 compared to excluding it from training.  

> 1
> 1While the above definition assumes a classification prob-lem, a more general notion of counterfactual memorization
> has been proposed in (Zhang et al., 2023) that can be ap-plied to Large Language Models (LLMs) or other generative models. The arguments made in this note hold for any type of architecture and training algorithm.

Recent works (Feldman, 2020; Feldman and Zhang, 2020; Jiang et al., 2020) find that atypical points (i.e. points from a low-density region of the data-generating distribution) such as misla-beled data points, are more highly memorized, since these are examples that would not have been predicted correctly unless they were part of the training dataset. For example, in a classifica-tion task, imagine a training example that is an image of a cat being labeled as a chair. During training, the model can fit this strange data point and predict its assigned label of chair. However, had this example been excluded from the train-ing set, the model would not predict that this cat is a chair. This discrepancy between the predic-tion on this data point of models that include it in training, compared to models that exclude it, leads to this data point being highly memorized according to Definition 3.1. Generally, the interaction between memoriza-tion and learning is an important active area of research, with theory works advocating that some memorization is even necessary for learning (At-tias et al., 2024; Feldman, 2020). However, while memorization is sometimes desirable, it is also in some cases unwanted, as it may cause vulnerabil-ity to membership inference attacks or data ex-traction attacks (Carlini et al., 2021, 2022; Shokri et al., 2017). Memorization according to Definition 3.1 can be seen as a form of “self-influence” (Kulynych et al., 2025), since it measures, in expectation, how much the predictions of an example would change when including or excluding that same example from the training set. In other words, the counterfactual memorization score is a measure of an example’s influence on itself. Kulynych et al. (2025) also define a notion of cross-influence .

Definition 3.2. Cross-influence (Kulynych et al., 2025). The cross-influence of an exam-ple 𝑥 𝑖 ∈ D towards another example 𝑥 𝑗 ∈ D with 

𝑖 ≠ 𝑗 , with respect to a training dataset D and training algorithm A is xinf (A , D, 𝑖, 𝑗 ) = Pr   

> 𝑓 ∼A ( D )

[ 𝑓 (𝑥 𝑗 ) = 𝑦 𝑗 ]− Pr   

> 𝑓 ∼A ( D\ 𝑖 )

[ 𝑓 (𝑥 𝑗 ) = 𝑦 𝑗 ] (2) where as before, the probability distributions 

> 3Is your algorithm unlearning or untraining?

are over the randomness of the algorithm A.Intuitively, the cross-influence of 𝑖 towards 𝑗 

measures the influence that including or exclud-ing example 𝑥 𝑖 from the training data has on the predictions for example 𝑥 𝑗 .

# 4. The classic “unlearning” definition 

In the previous section we defined two notions of influence that examples may exercise during training. Before introducing the distinction be-tween Unlearning and Untraining , we first describe the classic problem formulation of “un-learning”, which is motivated by the need to re-move the influence of specific examples from a model, e.g. to enable individuals to exercise their right to be forgotten. Let A (D) denote the weights of a model ob-tained by applying learning algorithm A on dataset D; we refer to this as the “original model”. Informally, according to the classic definition of machine unlearning, the goal is to remove the influence of a forget set S ⊂ D from the weights of the original model. A straightforward solution for this problem is to simply retrain a model from scratch on an ad-justed training set that excludes S, referred to as the “retain set”. The ideal solution is therefore 

A (D \ S) . However, retraining from scratch is in-efficient, especially for larger models. To address this, the goal of unlearning is to avoid throw-ing away the original model and instead devise an efficient algorithm U that can post-process it to produce an unlearned model U (A (D) , S, D) 

that approximates the ideal solution of having trained from scratch. Variations of technical definitions have been proposed that formalize this intuition (Gupta et al., 2021; Neel et al., 2021; Sekhari et al., 2021), drawing inspiration from differential pri-vacy (Dwork, 2006). 

Definition 4.1. (𝜀, 𝛿 )-unlearning (Neel et al., 2021). For a fixed randomized learning algo-rithm A, an unlearning algorithm U is (𝜀, 𝛿 )-unlearning with respect to A if for any dataset 

D, forget set S ⊂ D , it holds that for all 𝑅 ⊆ R 

we have: 

Pr [A (D \ S) ∈ 𝑅 ]≤ 𝑒 𝜀 Pr [U (A (D) , S, D) ∈ 𝑅 ] + 𝛿, 

and 

Pr [U (A (D) , S, D) ∈ 𝑅 ]≤ 𝑒 𝜀 Pr [A (D \ S) ∈ 𝑅 ] + 𝛿. 

where R denotes the output space, in this case, the space of model parameters. Measuring success of unlearning according to this definition requires estimating how close two distributions are to one another: the distribution of unlearning, i.e. U (A (D) , S, D) , and that of retraining from scratch, i.e. A (D \ S) . We refer to distributions here since running each of these two procedures with different random seeds that control, for instance, the initialization and order of mini-batches, will yield slightly different model weights each time. Hayes et al. (2024); Kurmanji et al. (2024); Pawelczyk et al. (2023); Triantafil-lou et al. (2024) discuss this issue of evaluation in more depth and propose rigorous evaluation procedures for this definition. Note that successful “unlearning”, according to this definition, is not (always) associated with mis-classifying the examples of the forget set: if the retrained model predicts an example correctly, so should the “unlearned” model. And the retrained model may predict some of the examples of the forget set correctly, even though they were not in its training data, because of generalization. In the following section, we argue that this clas-sic definition of unlearning is better described as 

Untraining . We will contrast it with a different problem that we will refer to as Unlearning .

# 5. Untraining vs Unlearning 

In this section, we disentangle two problem for-mulations both of which are referred to as “un-learning” in the literature. 

• As training is about minimizing empirical risk on a finite dataset D, Untraining on S ⊂ D is the process of reversing the empirical risk minimization on S. In other words, the 

> 4Is your algorithm unlearning or untraining?

Figure 1 | Illustration of the difference between Unlearning and Untraining on a forget set S. The different shapes correspond to data points in a dataset D. A shape is white if the model predicts it correctly and black otherwise. In the middle, we depict the predictions of the original model that was trained on all of D, before any Unlearning or Untraining is carried out. This model predicts correctly on all of its training set. On the left, we show the predictions of the model obtained by perfectly Untraining S, which matches the behaviour of a model trained on D \ S –i.e. a model trained on all of D except for the star and the two circles that belong to the forget set 

S. Notice that the Untrained model still predicts the circles correctly. This is because there are several other circles in the remaining dataset from where the model trained on D \ S can learn about circles. On the other hand, the star that was in the forget set is no longer predicted correctly, as there are fewer other stars in the dataset. On the right, we show the predictions of the model obtained by 

Unlearning the “behaviour” underlying S, where the “behaviour” in this case is “being a circle or a star”. The unlearned model makes incorrect predictions on all examples of that behaviour. ideal solution to Untraining is to find the model parameters minimizing empirical risk on only D \ S .

• On the other hand, learning and Unlearn-ing are about inducing and removing gen-eralization respectively. Unlearning a pat-tern, “concept” or “behaviour” from a given representative forget set S is to generalize the removal beyond the specific examples in S, to remove the entire underlying con-ditional distribution representing that con-cept, aiming to approximate a model that was never trained on any instance of that distribution. Notice that Untraining a forget set S does not mean that the model is unable to predict the examples of S correctly. A model trained purely on D \ S may still be able to predict the examples of S correctly due to generalization. Specifically, 

Untraining a forget set S will lead to: 

• No change to the model, if S has low self-influence and low cross-influence. 

• Make the model unable to predict on S but will not harm the model’s predictions on any other examples, if S has high self-influence but low cross-influence. 

• Make the model unable to predict on S and also harm the model’s predictions on other examples, if S has high self-influence and high cross-influence. On the other hand, Unlearning a pattern, concept or “behaviour” from a forget set S aims to always make the model unable to predict the examples of S any better than a model that never trained on any instances of the concept (i.e. a model that never learned the concept). We illustrate the difference between Untrain-

> 5Is your algorithm unlearning or untraining?

ing versus Unlearning , for a given forget set 

S in Figure 1. 

# 6. “Unlearning” of Definition 4.1 is ac-tually Untraining 

Let’s take a closer look at Definition 4.1. Accord-ing to this definition, the ideal “unlearning” algo-rithm produces a model that is indistinguishable (in distribution) from one retrained from scratch on the retain set D \S . Notably, this means that it is not the case that the ideal “unlearned” model is unable to predict correctly on the forget set (nor on examples that are similar to the forget set). In other words, “unlearning”, according to this definition, is not about removing all knowledge about the forget set (and related examples); it’s about removing only the additional knowledge about the forget set that existed only due to having trained on the forget set , i.e., the influence of the forget set. Let’s take as an example the case where S con-sists of non-memorized examples (more precisely, examples with low “memorization scores” accord-ing to Definition 3.1). We assume the original model A (D) predicts the examples of S correctly; a reasonable assumption given S ⊂ D. Now, the fact that the examples in S are not mem-orized means that the retrained-from-scratch model A (D \ S) also predicts the examples of 

S correctly. This means that the classic definition of “unlearning” (where retrain-from-scratch is the ideal “unlearning” algorithm), wants the “un-learned” model to still predict the examples of S

correctly, effectively necessitating no change over the original model. 2,3 An example of this phe-nomenon is given by the circles that are present in S in Figure 1: the ideal Untraining solution is still able to predict circles correctly. In the next section, we will discuss a different problem for-mulation, that we will refer to as Unlearning ,

> 2This observation has been previously made by Zhao et al. (2024), who also studies how existing unlearning algorithms perform on forget sets of different degrees of memorization.
> 3Note a nuance about a mismatch between the unlearn-ing definition referring to model weights whereas the mem-orization definition referring to model outputs. This is to comply with prior work that defines these notions; we leave it to future work to address this minor inconsistency.

where this will no longer be the case. 

# 7. Defining Unlearning 

We now define our notion of Unlearning a“concept” or “behaviour” from a trained model. Unlike Untraining where the goal is simply to remove the influence that the specific forget set had on the model, here we aim to generalize the removal beyond the given forget set, towards entirely removing the concept or behaviour that the forget set represents. We sketch a definition of this below. 

Definition 7.1. Unlearning . For a dataset D,let S 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 ⊂ D be the complete set of examples of 

D that capture a behaviour B. Let S ⊆ S 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 de-note the forget set that contains some examples of B. Then, for a fixed randomized learning al-gorithm A, an Unlearning algorithm U is one such that U (A (D) , S, D) is indistinguishable (in distribution) from A (D \ S 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 ).We make the following remarks. 1. We use the term “behaviour” loosely to refer to knowledge the model acquires from S 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 .We can similarly apply Unlearning for a “concept”, where S 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 is then the set of all examples of that concept. We use “behaviour” and “concept” interchangeably in this note. 2. Indistinguishability can be defined in differ-ent ways, e.g. through the hockey-stick di-vergence, similar to Definition 4.1, but other divergences are also possible. We purpose-fully keep this abstract in this note. 3. The goal of unlearning the behaviour B using the forget set S would be the removal of the cross influence of each example in S 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 on all examples in D.4. This is a conceptual definition to illustrate the notion of Unlearning (contrasting it to the notion of Untraining ), but in practice we may not be able to specify the set S 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 

containing every instantiation of a behaviour in a given dataset. 5. When S is very small, relative to S 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 , this may be referred to as “few-shot” Unlearn-ing (De Min et al., 2024; Yoon et al., 2024). 

> 6Is your algorithm unlearning or untraining?

6. If S includes all training instances of B, the 

Untraining S and Unlearning B are one and the same. 4

Notice that the definition of Unlearning has an element of generalization: from the specific forget set S showcasing a “behaviour” B, Un-learning generalizes to removing all knowledge of B, beyond S; analogously to how learning from a specific set of examples also leads to generaliza-tion in the sense of acquiring broader knowledge beyond the given set of examples. This is the key aspect that distinguishes Unlearning from 

Untraining . And this generalization of knowl-edge removal is crucial for removing unwanted behaviours from models, as in practice it’s not possible to specify every possible instantiation of a behaviour B in S.

Untraining vs Unlearning for the same forget set. Let’s now discuss how, for the same forget set S, the solutions of Untraining and 

Unlearning will (in general) be different. Let’s revisit our scenario from before where S con-tains only non-memorized examples of the tar-get “behaviour” B. In that case, the solution to 

Untraining would be to not take any action, leaving the model as is, since that approximates well the desired reference point of Untraining ,namely A (D \ S) . On the other hand, the solu-tion to Unlearning would be quite different, as a large modification would be required in this case to approximate a model A (D \ S 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 ) that never trained on any example of the behaviour that S represents. To give a different example, a model that was trained with Differential Privacy (DP) (Dwork, 2006) is one that does not memorize any of its training examples (more than permissible). Intu-itively, for a DP model, Untraining is then a no-op, whereas Unlearning is not, and would in fact require substantial modification to take the model from a state where it generalizes per-fectly to one that has no knowledge about the sub-distribution relating to the behaviour that it           

> 4The only other case where Untraining Sand Un-learning Bare the same is where the data manifold is such that removing Sdestroys the complete manifold of
> 𝑆 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 , but this case will not happen in practice.

is asked to Unlearn . 5

# 8. Why does this matter? 

The distinction between Unlearning and Un-training is not just of academic interest, but has important practical implications. Specifically, lacking this distinction can lead to several issues, summarized below. 

Unclear expectations. The lack of clear speci-fication of problem settings can leave us with un-clear expectations for when an algorithm should work well. There are recent examples in the litera-ture effectively showing that algorithms designed for Untraining perform very poorly for what we would refer to as Unlearning problems, but without identifying the distinction between those problem settings that we establish in this note. As an example, Goel et al. (2024); Schoepf et al. (2025) study “unlearning” corrupted data, in the settings of full discovery (all corrupted data is known and is placed in the forget set) and partial discovery (only a subset of the corrupted data is known and placed in the forget set). Goel et al. (2024) show that algorithms developed for Un-training (in their terminology, the “full discov-ery” setting) fail catastrophically in the partial-discovery setting, where only a subset of the cor-rupted data is discovered; a setting requiring an 

Unlearning algorithm that can generalize . This highlights that the two problem settings of Un-training and Unlearning are fundamentally distinct, and we may falsely expect an algorithm that performs well for one to also work well for the other, if we lack a clear distinction between these settings. Schoepf et al. (2025) initiates the study of how the “statistical regularity” of the “corruption” (or, in our more general case, the “concept” or the “behaviour” that we want to Unlearn ) affects how successfully different algorithms can generalize to remove the entire “corruption” under partial discovery. 

Ambiguity around evaluation metrics. Au-thors of “unlearning” papers may choose to use inappropriate metrics and baselines in their eval- 

> 5In fact a relevant discussion was held in the DP field, see e.g., https://github.com/frankmcsherry/blog/ blob/master/posts/2016-08-16.md.
> 7Is your algorithm unlearning or untraining?

uation, and reviewers of papers may request the inclusion of inappropriate metrics and baselines, further adding to the confusion. Many “unlearn-ing” metrics have been proposed, corresponding to different threat models (e.g white-box vs black-box access to the “unlearned model) and differ-ent use cases (Golatkar et al., 2020a; Hayes et al., 2024; Kurmanji et al., 2024; Łucki et al., 2024; Maini et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024; Triantafillou et al., 2024). Not all of these metrics are appropri-ate for both Untraining and Unlearning , so this distinction is necessary for ensuring that we evaluate in a reliable way that is informative of an algorithm’s performance for its intended use case. For example, if the goal is to Unlearn a danger-ous behaviour for safety, then using a Member-ship Inference Attack (MIA) (Carlini et al., 2021; Shokri et al., 2017) to attempt to infer whether the examples of the forget were part of the train-ing set of the model, is not appropriate, despite this being an established metric for Untrain-ing . The reason that this is not appropriate for 

Unlearning is that the goal of unlearning is not to remove the influence of only the forget set ex-amples: it might be the case that the MIA fails to identify that any of the forget set examples were once included in the model’s training set (success-ful Untraining ), but the model continues to have knowledge of the sub-distribution that the forget set was sampled from (unsuccessful Un-learning ), as would have been evidenced, for instance, by the success of an MIA to identify that 

other (non-forget set) examples from that distri-bution were in fact part of the training dataset. As another example, out of the evaluation metrics of the MUSE benchmark (Shi et al., 2024), do we always require every “unlearning” algorithm to satisfy all the criteria, e.g. “no verbatim memo-rization” and “no knowledge memorization” and “no privacy leakage”? We again argue that it de-pends on the underlying problem specification. 

Difficulty in interpreting results and trans-ferring insights. Li et al. (2025) recently ob-served an interesting behaviour that occurs with gradient ascent and the gradient ascent-based NPO method (Zhang et al., 2024b). Specifically, they find that, when using these methods, the resulting “unlearned” model indeed no longer generates the target sequence it was asked to forget, but is still able to generate semantically-related outputs that still contain the “unwanted knowledge”. This is because applying these meth-ods on specific target responses leads to redis-tributing the probability mass to other tokens and sequences that may actually correspond to semantically-related paraphrasing of the targets that should have been forgotten. But is this really a failure mode of NPO? Is NPO designed to be an Untraining or an Unlearning algorithm? Should we expect it to excel at both? These are open research questions that have not received sufficient attention because this important distinc-tion had not been previously established. To put it in our terminology, Li et al. (2025) are interested in Unlearning the unwanted behaviour, from a given specific instantiation of it, not Untrain-ing that specific instantiation only. Indeed, their proposed solution is to modify the algorithm to suppress not only specific target responses, but also “the mode’s beliefs”, effectively turning an 

Untraining algorithm into an Unlearning 

one. Establishing a common language that de-scribes these issues will allow to better share in-sights and interpretations of observed phenom-ena, and proposed solutions, across individual research papers. 

Critical research questions are left unex-plored. The lack of a distinction between Un-learning and Untraining has led to leaving important research questions unexplored, which we hope that future work pursues, including: (i) Which existing “unlearning” algorithms are bet-ter suited for Untraining compared to Un-learning ? (ii) How large does S need to be relative to S 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 for unlearning to succeed? In what ways does this depend on the Unlearning 

algorithm, the “representativeness” of S and the characteristics (e.g. statistical regularity) of the behaviour B?, (iii) How data efficient are differ-ent Unlearning algorithms and what are their trade-offs between data-efficiency vs precision? (iv) Can we characterize when we are better off spending more resources to find a larger subset of S 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 vs relying on the inherent generalization power of the Unlearning algorithm? (iv) Most “unlearning” algorithms were traditionally devel-oped for Untraining . Can we now also create algorithms that are explicitly designed with the 

> 8Is your algorithm unlearning or untraining?

appropriate inductive biases for generalization beyond the forget set in mind, perhaps drawing inspiration from algorithms developed for learn-ing from few examples? 

# 9. Mapping Untraining and Un-learning to the literature 

Examples of Untraining . The most promi-nent example, which was a key motivation behind several “unlearning” (more accurately, Untrain-ing ) works, is that of protecting user privacy, by honoring users’ requests to delete their data from models (Bourtoule et al., 2021; Golatkar et al., 2020a,b; Neel et al., 2021; Sekhari et al., 2021; Thudi et al., 2022). Another example is remov-ing data points that are mislabeled, outdated, or noisy (Goel et al., 2022; Kurmanji et al., 2024). Further, making the model unable to generate specific copyrighted sentences, such as the exact sentences appearing in the Harry Potter books (Eldan and Russinovich, 2023) is another exam-ple. Finally, ensuring specific data points aren’t extractable from LLMs (Barbulescu and Triantafil-lou, 2024; Jang et al., 2023) or from diffusion models (Alberti et al., 2025) are also applications that fall into this category, that may be useful to address either privacy or copyright issues. 

Examples of Unlearning . There are several recent examples of Unlearning in the litera-ture, including Unlearning dangerous knowl-edge or capabilities (Li et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024; Lynch et al., 2024) 6, erasing backdoors (Liu et al., 2022), or concepts like “not safe for work” (Fan et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024a). The notion of “corrective unlearning” (Goel et al., 2024) is also a type of Unlearning : the goal is to remove a “corruption” or poison from par-tial discovery of the training data that cause the corruption or poison. This topic is enjoying in-creasing attention recently (Schoepf et al., 2024, 2025). Similarly, Unlearning an “artistic style”    

> 6Recent research in LLMs is conducted on top of large pre-trained models, where we don’t have control of the training set and we don’t have knowledge of which training exam-ples gave rise to different “behaviours”. It’s possible that the forget sets used aren’t even part of the training set. We can accordingly also broaden Definition 7.1 to consider Sthat isn’t necessarily part of D.

from some examples of that style is falls into this category (Fan et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024c). Finally, Zhang et al. (2024d) recently observed a phenomenon they refer to as “ripple effect of un-learning”, which refers to the “generalization” of unlearning algorithms to unlearn several “harms”, even when those aren’t explicitly present in the forget set. They give an example where a model instructed to “unlearn” the steps for theft may also implicitly “unlearn” the steps for making a bomb. They hypothesize that this is possible due to the intrinsic relatedness of harmful responses, across different types of harms. In our terminol-ogy, this phenomenon can be seen as Unlearn-ing the ability to respond in a harmful manner, from some representative examples. 

# 10. Limitations 

Our goal in this note is not a complete taxonomy of unlearning algorithms; we refer the reader to existing surveys for this (Nguyen et al., 2022). Similarly, we don’t attempt to discuss potential failure modes and inherent limitations of attempt-ing to remove knowledge or control capabilities post-hoc (Cooper et al., 2024; Shumailov et al., 2024; Siddiqui et al., 2026). Instead, our con-tribution is to establish one important, yet pre-viously overlooked, axis that differentiates un-learning problems from one other: the fundamen-tal distinction between Unlearning and Un-training . Other dimensions discussed in prior work, such as differentiating “deleting” knowl-edge from “suppressing” knowledge (Che et al., 2025; Deeb and Roger, 2024; Hu et al., 2024; Siddiqui et al., 2025), are orthogonal to our defi-nitions. We also note that not all possible “concepts” can be unlearned using our definition of Unlearn-ing . The concepts or behaviours that are in scope are those that can be specified through a set of examples S. Other concepts that don’t have that property, such as, for example, “edge detection”, necessitate different definitions and are out of scope of this work. 

> 9Is your algorithm unlearning or untraining?

# 11. Conclusion and outlook 

We have argued that the term “unlearning” has been overloaded, with work falling under that umbrella spanning two distinct problem formu-lations, that we identify as Unlearning and 

Untraining . We establish the fundamental dis-tinction between Unlearning and Untrain-ing , aiming to initiate a discussion on techni-cal formulations of “unlearning” for different use cases, clarify their goals, and interpret the expec-tations and failure modes associated with existing “unlearning” algorithms, with the ultimate goal of creating better algorithms for Unlearning 

and Untraining . We hope the field now Un-learns the previous terminology and adopts our proposed conceptual framework for definitions that go beyond mere Untraining .

# 12. Questions we anticipate 

Q1 : Is the distinction between Untraining and 

Unlearning the same as the distinction be-tween “data unlearning” vs “concept unlearning” that is informally made in the literature? 

A: No. As we discussed at length, both the re-moval of individual data points as well as the re-moval of concepts can be operationalized through “unlearning” specific data points, i.e. through feeding a specific forget set (“data”) to an “un-learning algorithm”. But this procedure might cause several different outcomes, ranging from (i) not having any effect, to (ii) removing the in-fluence of a given data point from the model but not affecting anything else (e.g if this data point has low cross-influence), to (iii) removing an en-tire underlying concept. See Section 5. Should the term “data unlearning” be used in all of these cases? In the first case where there is no effect, would we still say that we “unlearned” that data? In the latter case where an entire concept is re-moved, would we still call that “data unlearning” or would we now call it “concept unlearning”? It’s unclear if these terms refer to the outcome or the mechanism , and because these notions have not been formalized, they may be used loosely to refer to either, which causes confusion. We define Untraining and Unlearning as mechanisms both of which operate on a given forget set S but that achieve well-specified out-comes that are defined as “matching” the refer-ence points A (D \ S) and A (D \ S 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 ), respec-tively. These definitions clearly specify the re-lationship between the input data, and the de-sired outcome. Note that satisfying the definition of Untraining might still cause different out-comes in terms of the predictions made on different examples in S as discussed, and Untraining 

may sometimes lead to Unlearning , just like training may (and often does) lead to learning. But unlike the distinction between “data unlearn-ing” and “concept unlearning”, these definitions are precise, can be mapped onto important use cases in the literature and we conjecture can be used as a solid basis for disambiguating goals, developing appropriate evaluation protocols for each and ultimately designing better algorithms for both of these important problems. 

Q2 : Isn’t the term “unlearning” too deeply en-grained now to be able to overwrite it? 

A: We believe the terms “un-memorizing” vs “un-generalizing” also capture the notion of Un-training vs Unlearning , and the terms “un-training” vs “un-cross-influencing” are also tech-nically correct, albeit perhaps a bit less natural. 

Q3 : Are you saying that every concept can be represented by a set of examples? 

A: No. Our goal is not to comment on how to represent concepts. Our goal is to distinguish 

Untraining , where the goal is to remove only the influence of a given set of examples, from Un-learning , where the goal is to remove knowl-edge beyond the influence exercised by the given set of examples. We choose to illustrate this dis-tinction by calling on the notion of a “concept” or a “behaviour” for convenience. 

Q4 : Isn’t the problem of Unlearning ill-posed? Unless S perfectly spans the feature space of S 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 , there are infinitely many ways in which a model might attempt to remove the entire S 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 

given only knowledge of S that do not match 

A (D \ S 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 ).

A: That’s correct, and it’s an issue that has been identified in related literature referred to as “con-

> 10 Is your algorithm unlearning or untraining?

cept erasure” (Amara et al., 2025). In this note, our goal is not to argue for the feasibility of achiev-ing Unlearning or Untraining , just to em-phasize that they are fundamentally distinct and yet entangled in the literature. 

# 13. Acknowledgements 

We thank Nicole Mitchell for helpful comments on an earlier draft. 

# References 

S. Alberti, K. Hasanaliyev, M. Shah, and S. Ermon. Data unlearning in diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.01034 , 2025. I. Amara, A. I. Humayun, I. Kajic, Z. Parekh, N. Harris, S. Young, C. Nagpal, N. Kim, J. He, C. N. Vasconcelos, et al. Erasing more than intended? how concept erasure degrades the generation of non-target concepts. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 16420–16430, 2025. I. Attias, G. K. Dziugaite, M. Haghifam, R. Livni, and D. M. Roy. Information Complexity of Stochastic Convex Optimization: Applications to Generalization and Memorization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09327 , 2024. G.-O. Barbulescu and P. Triantafillou. To each (textual sequence) its own: Improving memorized-data unlearning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.03097 ,2024. F. Barez, T. Fu, A. Prabhu, S. Casper, A. Sanyal, A. Bibi, A. O’Gara, R. Kirk, B. Bucknall, T. Fist, et al. Open problems in machine unlearning for AI safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.04952 ,2025. L. Bourtoule, V. Chandrasekaran, C. A. Choquette-Choo, H. Jia, A. Travers, B. Zhang, D. Lie, and N. Papernot. Machine Unlearning. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) , 2021. Y. Cao and J. Yang. Towards making systems forget with machine unlearning. In IEEE Sym-posium on Security and Privacy (SP) , pages 463– 480. IEEE, 2015. N. Carlini, F. Tramer, E. Wallace, M. Jagielski, A. Herbert-Voss, K. Lee, A. Roberts, T. Brown, D. Song, U. Erlingsson, et al. Extracting train-ing data from large language models. In 

USENIX security symposium (USENIX Security) ,pages 2633–2650, 2021. N. Carlini, S. Chien, M. Nasr, S. Song, A. Terzis, and F. Tramer. Membership inference attacks from first principles. In 2022 IEEE Symposium 

> 11 Is your algorithm unlearning or untraining?

on Security and Privacy (SP) , pages 1897–1914. IEEE, 2022. Z. Che, S. Casper, R. Kirk, A. Satheesh, S. Slocum, L. E. McKinney, R. Gandikota, A. Ewart, D. Rosati, Z. Wu, et al. Model tampering at-tacks enable more rigorous evaluations of LLM capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.05209 ,2025. A. F. Cooper, C. A. Choquette-Choo, M. Bogen, M. Jagielski, K. Filippova, K. Z. Liu, A. Choulde-chova, J. Hayes, Y. Huang, N. Mireshghal-lah, et al. Machine Unlearning Doesn’t Do What You Think: Lessons for Generative AI Policy, Research, and Practice. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.06966 , 2024. T. De Min, M. Mancini, S. Lathuilière, S. Roy, and E. Ricci. Unlearning personal data from a single image. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.12069 , 2024. A. Deeb and F. Roger. Do unlearning meth-ods remove information from language model weights? arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.08827 ,2024. C. Dwork. Differential Privacy. In International colloquium on automata, languages, and pro-gramming , pages 1–12. Springer, 2006. R. Eldan and M. Russinovich. Who’s Harry Potter? Approximate Unlearning for LLMs. 2023. C. Fan, J. Liu, Y. Zhang, D. Wei, E. Wong, and S. Liu. SalUn: Empowering Machine Unlearn-ing via Gradient-Based Weight Saliency in Both Image Classification and Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12508 , 2023. V. Feldman. Does Learning Require Memoriza-tion? A Short Tale About a Long Tail. In ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing ,pages 954–959, 2020. V. Feldman and C. Zhang. What Neural Networks Memorize and Why: Discovering the Long Tail via Influence Estimation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2020. P. Foret, A. Kleiner, H. Mobahi, and B. Neyshabur. Sharpness-Aware Minimization for Efficiently Improving Generalization. In International Con-ference on Learning Representations , 2021. S. Goel, A. Prabhu, A. Sanyal, S.-N. Lim, P. Torr, and P. Kumaraguru. Towards Adversarial Eval-uations for Inexact Machine Unlearning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.06640 , 2022. S. Goel, A. Prabhu, P. Torr, P. Kumaraguru, and A. Sanyal. Corrective Machine Unlearning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14015 , 2024. A. Golatkar, A. Achille, and S. Soatto. Eternal Sun-shine of the Spotless Net: Selective Forgetting in Deep Networks. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 9304–9312, 2020a. A. Golatkar, A. Achille, and S. Soatto. Forgetting Outside the Box: Scrubbing Deep Networks of Information Accessible from Input-Output Observations. In European Conference on Com-puter Vision (ECCV) , pages 383–398. Springer, 2020b. V. Gupta, C. Jung, S. Neel, A. Roth, S. Sharifi-Malvajerdi, and C. Waites. Adaptive Machine Unlearning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:16319–16330, 2021. J. Hayes, I. Shumailov, E. Triantafillou, A. Khalifa, and N. Papernot. Inexact Unlearning Needs More Careful Evaluations to Avoid a False Sense of Privacy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.01218 ,2024. S. Hu, Y. Fu, Z. S. Wu, and V. Smith. Unlearn-ing or obfuscating? jogging the memory of unlearned LLMs via benign relearning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.13356 , 2024. A. I. Humayun, R. Balestriero, and R. Baraniuk. Deep Networks Always Grok and Here is Why. In International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , 2024. L. A. Jaeckel. The infinitesimal jackknife . Bell Telephone Laboratories, 1972. J. Jang, D. Yoon, S. Yang, S. Cha, M. Lee, L. Lo-geswaran, and M. Seo. Knowledge unlearning for mitigating privacy risks in language models. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 14389–14408, 2023. 

> 12 Is your algorithm unlearning or untraining?

Z. Jiang, C. Zhang, K. Talwar, and M. C. Mozer. Characterizing Structural Regularities of La-beled Data in Overparameterized Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.03206 , 2020. P. W. Koh and P. Liang. Understanding Black-Box Predictions via Influence Functions. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning ,2017. B. Kulynych, J. F. Gomez, G. Kaissis, J. Hayes, B. Balle, F. P. Calmon, and J. L. Raisaro. Uni-fying re-identification, attribute inference, and data reconstruction risks in differential privacy. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06969 , 2025. M. Kurmanji, P. Triantafillou, J. Hayes, and E. Tri-antafillou. Towards Unbounded Machine Un-learning. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 2024. K. Li, Q. Wang, Y. Wang, F. Li, J. Liu, B. Han, and J. Zhou. LLM unlearning with LLM beliefs. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.19422 , 2025. N. Li, A. Pan, A. Gopal, S. Yue, D. Berrios, A. Gatti, J. D. Li, A.-K. Dombrowski, S. Goel, L. Phan, et al. The wmdp benchmark: Measuring and reducing malicious use with unlearning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03218 , 2024. S. Liu, Y. Yao, J. Jia, S. Casper, N. Baracaldo, P. Hase, Y. Yao, C. Y. Liu, X. Xu, H. Li, et al. Rethinking machine unlearning for large lan-guage models. Nature Machine Intelligence , 7 (2):181–194, 2025. Y. Liu, M. Fan, C. Chen, X. Liu, Z. Ma, L. Wang, and J. Ma. Backdoor defense with machine un-learning. In IEEE INFOCOM Conference on Com-puter Communications , pages 280–289. IEEE, 2022. Z. Liu, E. J. Michaud, and M. Tegmark. Omnigrok: Grokking Beyond Algorithmic Data. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations ,2023. Z. Liu, G. Dou, Z. Tan, Y. Tian, and M. Jiang. Towards safer large language models through machine unlearning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10058 , 2024. J. Łucki, B. Wei, Y. Huang, P. Henderson, F. Tramèr, and J. Rando. An adversarial per-spective on machine unlearning for ai safety. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.18025 , 2024. A. Lynch, P. Guo, A. Ewart, S. Casper, and D. Hadfield-Menell. Eight methods to evalu-ate robust unlearning in LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16835 , 2024. P. Maini, Z. Feng, A. Schwarzschild, Z. C. Lip-ton, and J. Z. Kolter. Tofu: A task of fic-titious unlearning for llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.06121 , 2024. A. Mantelero. The EU proposal for a general data protection regulation and the roots of the ‘right to be forgotten’. Computer Law & Security Review , 29(3):229–235, 2013. T. Miyato, T. Kataoka, M. Koyama, and Y. Yoshida. Spectral normalization for generative adversar-ial networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2018. S. Neel, A. Roth, and S. Sharifi-Malvajerdi. Descent-to-Delete: Gradient-Based Methods for Machine Unlearning. In Algorithmic Learn-ing Theory , pages 931–962. PMLR, 2021. T. T. Nguyen, T. T. Huynh, P. L. Nguyen, A. W.-C. Liew, H. Yin, and Q. V. H. Nguyen. A Sur-vey of Machine Unlearning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.02299 , 2022. M. Pawelczyk, S. Neel, and H. Lakkaraju. In-context unlearning: Language models as few shot unlearners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07579 , 2023. M. Pawelczyk, J. Z. Di, Y. Lu, A. Sekhari, G. Ka-math, and S. Neel. Machine unlearning fails to remove data poisoning attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.17216 , 2024. A. Power, Y. Burda, H. Edwards, I. Babuschkin, and V. Misra. Grokking: Generalization Be-yond Overfitting on Small Algorithmic Datasets. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.02177 , 2022. G. Pruthi, F. Liu, S. Kale, and M. Sundararajan. Es-timating training data influence by tracing gra-dient descent. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33:19920–19930, 2020. 

> 13 Is your algorithm unlearning or untraining?

S. Schoepf, J. Foster, and A. Brintrup. Potion: Towards poison unlearning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09173 , 2024. S. Schoepf, M. C. Mozer, N. E. Mitchell, A. Brin-trup, G. Kaissis, P. Kairouz, and E. Triantafil-lou. Redirection for Erasing Memory (REM): Towards a universal unlearning method for cor-rupted data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.17730 ,2025. A. Sekhari, J. Acharya, G. Kamath, and A. T. Suresh. Remember What You Want to Forget: Algorithms for Machine Unlearning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34: 18075–18086, 2021. W. Shi, J. Lee, Y. Huang, S. Malladi, J. Zhao, A. Holtzman, D. Liu, L. Zettlemoyer, N. A. Smith, and C. Zhang. Muse: Machine unlearn-ing six-way evaluation for language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.06460 , 2024. R. Shokri, M. Stronati, C. Song, and V. Shmatikov. Membership Inference Attacks from First Princi-ples. In IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP) , pages 3–18. IEEE, 2017. I. Shumailov, J. Hayes, E. Triantafillou, G. Ortiz-Jimenez, N. Papernot, M. Jagielski, I. Yona, H. Howard, and E. Bagdasaryan. Ununlearning: Unlearning is not sufficient for content regula-tion in advanced generative AI. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.00106 , 2024. S. A. Siddiqui, A. Weller, D. Krueger, G. K. Dziu-gaite, M. C. Mozer, and E. Triantafillou. From Dormant to Deleted: Tamper-Resistant Un-learning Through Weight-Space Regularization. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22310 , 2025. S. A. Siddiqui, E. Triantafillou, D. Krueger, and A. Weller. Position: Capability control should be a separate goal from alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.05164 , 2026. A. Thudi, G. Deza, V. Chandrasekaran, and N. Pa-pernot. Unrolling SGD: Understanding Factors Influencing Machine Unlearning. In IEEE Eu-ropean Symposium on Security and Privacy (Eu-roS&P) , pages 303–319. IEEE, 2022. E. Triantafillou, P. Kairouz, F. Pedregosa, J. Hayes, M. Kurmanji, K. Zhao, V. Dumoulin, J. J. Ju-nior, I. Mitliagkas, J. Wan, et al. Are We Mak-ing Progress in Unlearning? Findings from the First NeurIPS Unlearning Competition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09073 , 2024. V. Vapnik. The Nature of Statistical Learning The-ory . Springer Science & Business Media, 2013. Y. Yao, X. Xu, and Y. Liu. Large language model unlearning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:105425–105475, 2024. Y. Yoon, J. Nam, H. Yun, J. Lee, D. Kim, and J. Ok. Few-shot Unlearning. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) , pages 3276–3292. IEEE, 2024. C. Zhang, D. Ippolito, K. Lee, M. Jagielski, F. Tramèr, and N. Carlini. Counterfactual Mem-orization in Neural Language Models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36: 39321–39362, 2023. G. Zhang, K. Wang, X. Xu, Z. Wang, and H. Shi. Forget-me-not: Learning to forget in text-to-image diffusion models. In IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion , pages 1755–1764, 2024a. H. Zhang, M. Cisse, Y. N. Dauphin, and D. Lopez-Paz. Mixup: Beyond Empirical Risk Minimiza-tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.09412 , 2017. R. Zhang, L. Lin, Y. Bai, and S. Mei. Negative preference optimization: From catastrophic col-lapse to effective unlearning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05868 , 2024b. Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Yao, J. Jia, J. Liu, X. Liu, and S. Liu. Unlearncanvas: A stylized image dataset to benchmark machine unlearning for diffusion models. CoRR , 2024c. Z. Zhang, J. Yang, Y. Lu, P. Ke, S. Cui, C. Zheng, H. Wang, and M. Huang. From theft to bomb-making: The ripple effect of unlearning in de-fending against jailbreak attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.02855 , 2024d. K. Zhao, M. Kurmanji, G.-O. Bărbulescu, E. Tri-antafillou, and P. Triantafillou. What makes 

> 14 Is your algorithm unlearning or untraining?

unlearning hard and what to do about it. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,37:12293–12333, 2024.